docs(pki): Add RFC to document how an external PKI work with Parsec (#11231)
Scille/parsec-cloud: docs/rfcs/1020-pki-support.md

    - The PKI certificate.
    - A payload consisting of the public parts of the user & device keys pairs and the desired device label ([`PkiEnrollmentSubmitPayload`]) (signed using [`pki_enrollment_sign_payload`]).

 7. Mallory (a CoolOrg admin which also has the PKI configured, this time the OS certificate store hold the private key and x509 certificate) sees the enrollment request from Alice ([`pki_enrollment_list`]).
 8. Mallory verifies the provided x509 certificate ([`pki_enrollment_load_peer_certificate`]) and provided data ([`pki_enrollment_load_submit_payload`]).

    > [!NOTE]
    > The verification of the certificate implies that we have access to the root certificates to be able to verify the trust chain.

 9. If Mallory accepts the request (after being validated), it creates the Alice's user and device certificates with the provided user & device public keys.
10. Mallory signs both certificates with its device signing key. Then prepares the "accept" response payload ([`PkiEnrollmentAnswerPayload`])
11. Mallory selects the x509 certificate (from the certificate store of the OS) ([`pki_enrollment_select_certificate`])

> 12. Mallory sign the response payload with the certificate ([`pki_enrollment_sign_payload`])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
12. Mallory signs the response payload with the certificate ([`pki_enrollment_sign_payload`])
```

13. Mallory sends the signed accept response payload alongside the used x509 certificate to the server ([`pki_enrollment_accept`])

    > [!NOTE]

>     > The payload destined to Alice is signed with the x509 certificate, but the request needs to be authenticated to the server so it's sign with Mallory's device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    > The payload destined to Alice is signed with the x509 certificate, but the request needs to be authenticated to the server so it's signed with Mallory's device.
```

14. Alice checks the server to see the state of the request ([`pki_enrollment_info`])
15. Alice retrieves the accept response from the server
16. Alice starts validating the provided admin's x509 certificate ([`pki_enrollment_load_peer_certificate`]) and accept response payload signature ([`pki_enrollment_load_accept_payload`])
17. From that accept response payload and the saved local pending part ([`pki_enrollment_load_local_pending_secret_part`]), Alice is able to create a local device and use it to access the organization.

> Alternative, if Mallory wasn't able to verify the payload (because on invalid certificate or signature) during step 8 or decided to reject the request at step 9,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternative, if Mallory wasn't able to verify the payload (because of invalid certificate or signature) during step 8 or decided to reject the request at step 9,
```

[`pki_enrollment_create_local_pending`]: https://github.com/Scille/parsec-extensions/blob/5f0ae5ac44d23d775d92e241b546fc0cac327a0a/parsec_ext/smartcard/__init__.py#L279-L333
[`pki_enrollment_load_peer_certificate`]: https://github.com/Scille/parsec-extensions/blob/5f0ae5ac44d23d775d92e241b546fc0cac327a0a/parsec_ext/smartcard/__init__.py#L336-L355
[`pki_enrollment_load_submit_payload`]: https://github.com/Scille/parsec-extensions/blob/5f0ae5ac44d23d775d92e241b546fc0cac327a0a/parsec_ext/smartcard/__init__.py#L385-L406
[`pki_enrollment_load_accept_payload`]: https://github.com/Scille/parsec-extensions/blob/5f0ae5ac44d23d775d92e241b546fc0cac327a0a/parsec_ext/smartcard/__init__.py#L409-L430
[`pki_enrollment_load_local_pending_secret_part`]: https://github.com/Scille/parsec-extensions/blob/5f0ae5ac44d23d775d92e241b546fc0cac327a0a/parsec_ext/smartcard/__init__.py#L433-L473

## Design

Here is a possible user flow of Alice (Submitter) joining the organization CoolOrg using the PKI support:

 1. Alice wants to join CoolOrg organization by using the provided submission link to submit a request.

>  3. Alice select the x509 certificate (from the smartcard) to use for the enrollment ([`pki_enrollment_select_certificate`])

Reviewer: 2. is missing.

11. Mallory selects the x509 certificate (from the certificate store of the OS) ([`pki_enrollment_select_certificate`])
12. Mallory signs the response payload with the certificate ([`pki_enrollment_sign_payload`])
13. Mallory sends the signed accept response payload alongside the used x509 certificate to the server ([`pki_enrollment_accept`])

    > [!NOTE]
    > The payload destined to Alice is signed with the x509 certificate, but the request needs to be authenticated to the server so it's signed with Mallory's device.

14. Alice checks the server to see the state of the request ([`pki_enrollment_info`])
15. Alice retrieves the accept response from the server
16. Alice starts validating the provided admin's x509 certificate ([`pki_enrollment_load_peer_certificate`]) and accept response payload signature ([`pki_enrollment_load_accept_payload`])
17. From that accept response payload and the saved local pending part ([`pki_enrollment_load_local_pending_secret_part`]), Alice is able to create a local device and use it to access the organization.

> 

Reviewer: So to recap, the only steps that require human user action are:
- for alice
    - retrieve and input the invitation link
    - select the certificate
    - review mallory's certificate
    - usual device creation flow
- for Mallory 
    - review alice's certificate 
    - select certificate
    - usual invitation flow (choose role, check name ...)

The other steps are managed by the client.

Am I missing a step ?

Author: The review alice/mallory certificate is done by the client, not the user as we verify is the provided certificate is signed by a trusted root.

Or maybe it's a confusion between a certificate and the request :thinking:

<!-- Parsec Cloud (https://parsec.cloud) Copyright (c) BUSL-1.1 2016-present Scille SAS -->

# PKI Support

## Overview

Add support to use Parsec with an externally managed PKI

## Background & Motivation

Some organizations manage their own PKI, and want Parsec to rely on that PKI.

That custom PKI come in the form of certificate with their private key often loaded in a dedicated device (a smartcard/token like a YubiKey).

> They would like that we use their certificate to access Parsec, so the user does not have to use a password or rely on the keyring of the OS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They would like to use their certificates to access Parsec, so the users do not have to use a password or rely on the keyring of the OS.
```

There is also an opportunity to rely on that PKI to join an organization.

Put in a simpler term access Parsec using a Smartcard.

### Terms:

- **PKI**: Public Key Infrastructure

> - **Smartcard** or **Token**:

Reviewer 3: I'd rather avoid using `Token` here since we already use token in multiple places in the code base for something different

>   A tangible device that is similar to an USB stick (that store data).

Reviewer 3: same, "device" has already its own meaning in Parsec
```suggestion
  A component providing cryptographic capabilities, typically in USB stick or Smartcard (hence the name) format.
  This component provides both encryption (used to securely store secrets such as the local device) and signature (used to join new organization).
```

  That device is used to securely store private key, secrets and is able to perform cryptographic operations
- **Submitter**: A user/device submitting a request to join an organization using the PKI feature.
- **Accepter**: A user/device admin of an organization in charge of accepting or not the join request.

## Goals and Non-Goals

Some prior work was already done to add some primitives (sign, verify, encrypt, decrypt) to work with the windows certificate store under the `libparsec_platform_pki`.

> The goals are to define the higher elements to make the PKI work with Parsec for the invitation process, those higher elements are:

Reviewer 2: So this is API is strictly based on what's been done in V2?

Or there is already some design/suggestions/ideas involved that make it somehow different from V2?

[`pki_enrollment_create_local_pending`]: https://github.com/Scille/parsec-extensions/blob/5f0ae5ac44d23d775d92e241b546fc0cac327a0a/parsec_ext/smartcard/__init__.py#L279-L333
[`pki_enrollment_load_peer_certificate`]: https://github.com/Scille/parsec-extensions/blob/5f0ae5ac44d23d775d92e241b546fc0cac327a0a/parsec_ext/smartcard/__init__.py#L336-L355
[`pki_enrollment_load_submit_payload`]: https://github.com/Scille/parsec-extensions/blob/5f0ae5ac44d23d775d92e241b546fc0cac327a0a/parsec_ext/smartcard/__init__.py#L385-L406
[`pki_enrollment_load_accept_payload`]: https://github.com/Scille/parsec-extensions/blob/5f0ae5ac44d23d775d92e241b546fc0cac327a0a/parsec_ext/smartcard/__init__.py#L409-L430
[`pki_enrollment_load_local_pending_secret_part`]: https://github.com/Scille/parsec-extensions/blob/5f0ae5ac44d23d775d92e241b546fc0cac327a0a/parsec_ext/smartcard/__init__.py#L433-L473

## Design

Here is a possible user flow of Alice joining the organization CoolOrg using the PKI to enable the async enrollment feature:

 1. Alice wants to join CoolOrg organization.

>  2. Alice already has a PKI configured on its system and the link to submit the join request.

Reviewer 2: What does it means to have a "PKI configured on its system"? In addition to having access to its physical smartcard, what Alice needs to configure?

>  2. Alice already has a PKI configured on its system and the link to submit the join request.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 2. Alice already has a PKI configured (i.e. Alice has a Smartcard containing a x509 certificate and its corresponding encryption/signature keys) on its system and the link to submit the join request.
```

 3. Alice select the certificate to use for the enrollment ([`pki_enrollment_select_certificate`])

    > [!IMPORTANT]

>     > The certificate need to have a `CommonName` ([oid-2.5.4.3](https://oid-base.com/get/2.5.4.3)) and a `EmailAddress` ([oid-1.2.840.113549.1.9.1](https://oid-base.com/get/1.2.840.113549.1.9.1)) attributes in the certificate's subject.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    > The certificate needs to have a `CommonName` ([oid-2.5.4.3](https://oid-base.com/get/2.5.4.3)) and a `EmailAddress` ([oid-1.2.840.113549.1.9.1](https://oid-base.com/get/1.2.840.113549.1.9.1)) attributes in the certificate's subject.
```

 4. Alice creates an encryption (for the user certificate) and signing key pair (for the device certificate).
 4. Alice save the private parts of the key pairs on the filesystem ([`pki_enrollment_create_local_pending`]).

>  5. Alice submits the request (authorized to re-submit later on with updated information) with: ([`pki_enrollment_submit`]):

Author: Yes, but previous request using the same certificate would be cancelled

>     - The PKI certificate.

Reviewer 2: Should we add something like this?
```suggestion
    - The PKI certificate (from its smartcard or from the certificate store)
```

Author: It's a details not important to Parsec with the used API: https://github.com/Scille/parsec-cloud/pull/11231/files#r2394867382

>     - The PKI certificate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - The x509 certificate from her Smartcard.
```

    - The signed payload consisting of the public key pairs parts and the desired device label ([`PkiEnrollmentSubmitPayload`]) (signed using [`pki_enrollment_sign_payload`]).

 6. Mallory (a CoolOrg admin) sees the enrollment request from Alice ([`pki_enrollment_list`]).
 7. Mallory verifies the provided PKI certificate ([`pki_enrollment_load_peer_certificate`]) and provided data ([`pki_enrollment_load_submit_payload`]).
 8. If Mallory accepts the request (after being validated), it creates the Alice's user and device certificates with the provided verification and encryption keys.
 9. Mallory sign both certificate with its device signing key. Then prepare the "accept" response payload ([`PkiEnrollmentAnswerPayload`])
10. Mallory select a certificate ([`pki_enrollment_select_certificate`])
11. Mallory sign the response payload with the certificate ([`pki_enrollment_sign_payload`])
12. Mallory send the signed payload alongside the used certificate to the server ([`pki_enrollment_accept`])
13. Alice check the server to see the state of the request ([`pki_enrollment_info`])

> 14. Alice retrieve the accept response from the server

Reviewer 2: Even if not so interesting, maybe we should mention what happen (or how Parsec should behave if rejected).

Author: done

[`pki_enrollment_info`]: https://github.com/Scille/parsec-cloud/blob/v2.17.0/oxidation/libparsec/crates/protocol/schema/anonymous_cmds/pki_enrollment_info.json5

### Select a certificate

[`pki_enrollment_select_certificate`] will present a native dialog to select a certificate detected by windows (generated by `CryptUI` API)
and verify that the chosen certificate is able to sign a payload by default by using [`pki_enrollment_sign_payload`].

### Sign a payload

[`pki_enrollment_sign_payload`] take a payload to sign using a referenced certificate

> [!NOTE]:
> It's already provided by [`sign_message`]

[`sign_message`]: https://github.com/Scille/parsec-cloud/blob/a74cb0f3cfd29a9deb2878c3ddd8182ffad79ba9/libparsec/crates/platform_pki/src/lib.rs#L69-L72

### Create the local part of the async enrollment

[`pki_enrollment_create_local_pending`] create a pending enrollment ([`LocalPendingEnrollment`]) consisting of the following information:

- Certificate ref (provided)
- Server addr (provided)
- Creation date (provided)

> - Enrollment ID (provided)

Author: Yep

- Submit payload (provided)
- Encrypted key (generated): A random key used to encrypt/decrypt `cleartext`/`ciphertext`, that is encrypted using the external PKI.
- Ciphertext (generated): Is a MSGPack data containing the private key (provided) and signing key (provided) of the device that was encrypted by the random key.

> The pending enrollment contain everything to create a device but wait to be enrolled in an organization before create the device on the client side.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The pending enrollment contains everything to create a device but waits to be enrolled in an organization before creating the device on the client side.
```

[`LocalPendingEnrollment`]: https://github.com/Scille/parsec-cloud/blob/df7bc6891989830c4d93f0b88ddaac9ade6b620c/libparsec/crates/types/schema/pki/local_pending_enrollment.json5

### Submit the request to join an organization

Part of the anonymous API [`pki_enrollment_submit`] allow an user to request join an organization by using an external PKI.

> ```yaml

Author: It's simpler for me to edit yaml instead of json, I will convert them to json once the discussion around the schema are stable enough

cmd: pki_enrollment_submit
req:
  fields:
    # UUID of the current request, generated by the sender.
    - name: enrollment_id
      type: EnrollmentID
    # Allow to submit a new request to replace a pending one.
    # A request is identified by its `submitter_der_x509_certificate`.
    - name: force
      type: Bool
    # The certificate used by the sender to sign the payload
    - name: der_x509_certificate
      type: Bytes
    # The signature of the payload
    - name: payload_signature
      type: Bytes
    # PkiEnrollmentSubmitPayload serialized in msgpack format
    - name: payload
      type: Bytes
reps:
  # The request was accepted by the server and need to be reviewed by an organization admin.
  - status: ok
    fields:
      - name: submitted_on
        type: DateTime
  # An enrollment request already exist for the provided certificate.
  - status: already_submitted
    fields:
      - name: submitted_on
        type: DateTime
  - status: id_already_used
  # The server check if an user doesn't already exist using the email contained in the certificate.
  - status: email_already_used

>   # We tries to submit a new enrollment request, but the certificate was already used with an accepted request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  # The certificate was already used with an accepted request.
```

      - name: enrollment_id
        type: EnrollmentID
      # When the request was made
      - name: submitted_on
        type: DateTime
      # The certificate used by the submitter to sign the request.
      # The server does not perform any validation on the certificate,
      # those verifications need to be made by the "accepter"
      - name: der_x509_certificate
        type: Bytes
      # The signature of the payload
      - name: payload_signature
        type: Bytes
      # The payload, it's a `PkiEnrollmentSubmitPayload` formatted in msgpack
      - name: payload
        type: Bytes
```

### Load a certificate

[`pki_enrollment_load_peer_certificate`] load a provided x509 certificate in DER format and only extract the issuer and subject from it.
It also creates a fingerprint for the provided certificate.

### Load submitted payload

[`pki_enrollment_load_submit_payload`] Take a payload and a certificate, the certificate is validated against a set of trusted root certificate and it can be used to sign data (`digital_signature`).
Once the certificate validated, we can validate the payload signature against the certificate public verification key

> [!NOTE]

> > Both steps can be concurrent

Author: Yep, verifying the certificate and payload signature can be done in parallel

### Accept the enrollment request

[`pki_enrollment_accept`]

```yaml
cmd: pki_enrollment_accept
req:
  fields:
    # ID of the accepted request
    - name: enrollment_id
      type: EnrollmentID
    # Certificate used to sign the payload by the "accepter"
    - name: der_x509_certificate
      type: Bytes
    # Signature of the payload
    - name: payload_signature
      type: Bytes
    # `PkiEnrollmentAnswerPayload` in msgpack format
    - name: payload
      type: Bytes
    - name: device_certificate
      type: Bytes
    - name: redacted_device_certificate
      type: Bytes
    - name: user_certificate
      type: Bytes
    - name: redacted_user_certificate
      type: Bytes
reps:
  - status: ok
  # The user does not have the correct permission to perform that action
  - status: not_allowed
    fields:
      - name: reason

>         type: NonRequiredOption<String>

Author: done
